.TH COOK 1 "" "ai @VERSION@" "ai manual"
.SH NAME
cook \- a dependency-driven build tool, make in ai
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B cook
.RI [ options ]
.RI [ recipe ...]
.br
.B ai
.B \-l
.I cook/cook.l
.RI [ options ]
.RI [ recipe ...]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B cook
brings an
.I item
up to date when it is missing or older than any of its prerequisites, running
the item's recipe over freshened prerequisites first \(em the whole of make's
idea. It is written in
.BR ai (1)
and runs on it.
.PP
With no
.BR \-f ,
cook discovers a build file in the current directory, preferring an ai-native
recipe file over a Makefile: a legacy
.B Cards.l
first, then a
.BR Cookfile ,
then a
.BR Makefile .
Only a file named like a Makefile
.RB ( Makefile ", " makefile ", " GNUmakefile ", " *.mk )
is ever read as make; a
.B Cards.l
or
.B Cookfile
is ai source. Name one explicitly with
.B \-f
to override. Like
.BR make ,
cook takes its options in any order and treats every non-option word as a
.I recipe
to build; with no recipe it builds the first one declared.
.SS Makefile
cook reads an ordinary
.B Makefile
directly \(em a reasonably GNU-make-compatible import: recursive
.RB $( VAR )
expansion and substitution references, the common functions
.RB ( $( shell ),
.RB $( wildcard ),
.RB $( dir ),
.RB $( patsubst ),
.RB $( filter ),
\&...),
.BR ifeq / ifdef
conditionals,
.BR include ,
the
.B "= := ?= +="
assignment flavors, pattern rules and static patterns, order-only
prerequisites, and the
.BR $@ " " $< " " $^ " " $*
automatic variables. Each recipe line is run through
.BR sh (1),
so pipes, globs and redirections work.
.SS Cookfile
A
.B Cookfile
is ordinary ai source that registers recipes and then calls
.BR cook :
.PP
.RS
.EX
(recipe "hello" '("hello.o" "greet.o")
        '(("cc" "-o" "hello" "hello.o" "greet.o")))
(recipe 'clean '() '(("rm" "-f" "hello" "hello.o")))
(cook-all 0)
.EE
.RE
.PP
A card is
.RI ( recipe
.I "item ingredients steps" ):
an
.I item
is a filename string or a phony symbol, ingredients are the items it needs
first, and steps are argv lists (run as subprocesses) or thunks. Item ages come
from
.BR stat (1);
a phony symbol owns no file, so it is ageless and always cooks.
.PP
A Cookfile drives itself:
.B (cook\-all 0)
builds every
.I recipe
named on the command line (or the default when none), while
.B (cook (ticket 0))
builds just the first.
.B \-\-emit
generates a Cookfile ending in
.BR "(cook\-all 0)" .
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-f ", " \-\-file " " \fIFILE\fR
The build file (a Makefile or a Cookfile). If omitted, it is discovered in the
current directory. For compatibility, when no
.B \-f
is given the first non-option word that names an existing file is taken as the
build file and the rest are recipes.
.TP
.B \-\-emit
Transpile the Makefile to a fully resolved
.B Cookfile
on standard output \(em variables, the make functions and pattern rules
expanded, each recipe line an
.RB ( "sh \-c" " " \fIcmd\fR )
step \(em then exit without cooking.
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-version
Print the version and exit.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print a usage summary and exit.
.PP
.RB ( help " and " version
are also accepted as bare words.)
.SH OPERANDS
.TP
.I recipe
An item to build: a filename, or a phony target named in the build file. Any
number may be given (they are built in order); the default is the first recipe
declared.
.SH EXAMPLES
Build the default target from the build file in the current directory:
.RS
.EX
cook
.EE
.RE
.PP
Build named targets (in order) from a chosen Makefile:
.RS
.EX
cook \-f Makefile clean all
.EE
.RE
.PP
Transpile a Makefile to a resolved Cookfile:
.RS
.EX
cook \-\-emit \-f Makefile > Cookfile
.EE
.RE
.PP
Without the installed symlink, loading cook by hand:
.RS
.EX
ai \-l cook/cook.l Makefile host
.EE
.RE
.SH EXIT STATUS
.B cook
exits
.B 0
when every cooked item is up to date, and non-zero when a recipe command fails
or a needed item has neither a recipe nor a file.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR ai (1),
.BR make (1).
The project README, and
.I tools/cook-example/
for a worked C build.
