.TH AI 1 "" "ai @VERSION@" "ai manual"
.SH NAME
ai \- a curried lisp over a tiny generic core
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B ai
.RB [ \-l
.IR lib ]
.RB [ \-e
.IR expr ]
.RB [ \-v ]
.RB [ \-h ]
.RB [ \-\- ]
.RI [ file
.RI [ arg
\&...]]
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B ai
is a small lisp in which every value is a total function of one argument and
application is left-to-right currying:
.RI ( f
.IR x
.IR y )
is
.RI (( f
.IR x )
.IR y )
and
.RI ( f )
is
.IR f .
Numbers are Church numerals, a list of numbers is a tower of exponents, and
data self-applies (it indexes). The core is fully generic: every operation
dispatches on a value's kind, and the kinds form a lattice ordered by a single
total order over all values.
.PP
There are three special forms \(em
.B :
(letrec*/sequence),
.B ?
(cond), and
.B \e
(lambda, or quote with a single operand) \(em and everything else is a function
call. Truth is the net measure: a value is false when it nets to nothing and
true when it nets positive.
.PP
With a
.I file
argument (or
.BR \-e ),
.B ai
runs it as the program and exits; any further arguments are the program's, in
.BR argv .
With no program it starts an interactive read-eval-print loop when standard
input is a terminal, and otherwise reads and evaluates standard input to end of
file.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
\fB\-l\fP \fIlib\fP, \fB\-\-load\fP \fIlib\fP
Preload
.I lib
(read-eval it to end of file) before the program. May be repeated.
.TP
\fB\-e\fP \fIexpr\fP, \fB\-\-eval\fP \fIexpr\fP
Read-eval the forms in
.IR expr ,
as the program.
.TP
.BR \-v ", " \-\-version
Print the version and exit.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print a usage summary and exit.
.TP
.B \-\-
End option processing: the next argument is the program, the rest are its
arguments.
.TP
.I file
A program to load. The first
.I file
is the program; further arguments are passed to it in
.BR argv .
A file that cannot be opened is a fatal error.
.SH EXAMPLES
.PP
Evaluate a file:
.PP
.RS
.EX
ai prog.l
.EE
.RE
.PP
Load a library, then run a script:
.PP
.RS
.EX
ai \-l lib.l prog.l
.EE
.RE
.PP
Evaluate an expression:
.PP
.RS
.EX
ai \-e '(. (+ 1 2))'
.EE
.RE
.PP
Evaluate from standard input:
.PP
.RS
.EX
echo '(+ 1 2)' | ai
.EE
.RE
.PP
Start the interactive shell:
.PP
.RS
.EX
ai
.EE
.RE
.SH EXIT STATUS
.B ai
exits
.B 0
on success and non-zero on a fatal error, such as a file that cannot be opened
or an explicit
.RI ( exit
.IR n ).
.SH SEE ALSO
The project README and the executable specification in
.IR test/spec.l ,
which asserts every claim of the language on every build target.
